# Data analysis capstone project
This notebook called "Project M2S4-finalVersion.ipynb" is part of the Turing College assignment of Module 4 Sprint 4. It can be used as a standalone file as it has the code required to download the dataset included. However, user API key is required (instructions provided below). Direct access to the data at https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/prajitdatta/ultimate-25k-matches-football-database-european

# The project introduction

BUSINESS PROBLEM: I am a data scientist working in a sports betting company. The business executives in my company after some initial analysis identified betting on soccer (European football) as an potential new business opportunity. The problem is that my company doesn't know a lot about soccer (European football). My manager asked me to analyze this dataset and see if I can provide anything that could give us a competitive advantage in the attempt to start strong in the new endeavor.

APPROACH TO THE PROBLEM: Me and my colleagues were surprised by the huge number of parameters each player and each match has. This is why I have decided to do a thorough analysis of the metrics to build a strong foundation for possible betting predictions. As the project got bigger and bigger, I have limited the amount of predictions and finetuning of models because the notebook became too laggy and time-consuming to run/work with.

STEP BY STEP SOLUTION:

-Extract and analyze data in the tables. Understand what each of the metrics mean, whether they are numerical or categorical, how are they distributed, who are the sportsmen historically demonstrating highest metrics. Account for the features that are correlated and would allow dimensionality reduction or the simplification of the analysis in general.

-Answer to particular questions me and my colleagues had initially:
Are players playing as best as they can (at full potential)?
Which metrics of players do correlate?
What are the physical parameters of players, like height, weight, BMI and age; and do they correlate with performance? Are they a useful metric for prediction?
What is the most popular first and last names among football players?
Is there such a thing as Relative Age Effect (RAE)?
Which leagues are in which countries?
Which leagues score the most/fewest goals?
Is there such a thing as home advantage?
Which country hosted the most matches?
What is the most popular word in names of the teams?
Are there teams' attributes that correlate with each other?
Who are the top scorers in each league?

-Try to predict, evaluate the performance of models and build a strategy for future work:
Can we predict how many goals each team will score in each match?
Can we predict which team will win the match?
Suggest how to improve predictions to successfully enter the betting game.

# Installation
Notes on additional resources for installation are provided below.

## SQLite
SQLite relational database management system is embedded in Python thus no additional package installations are necessary assuming user already has Python installed.

## Kaggle.com access
The following command were used to configure kaggle.com access:

1. pip install --user kaggle
2. Download Kaggle API file and place it into: ~/.kaggle/kaggle.json
3. Include security measures by modifying the access: chmod 600 ~/.kaggle/kaggle.json
4. Datasets can be than downloaded using the following command: "!kaggle datasets download -d {address}", where {address} can be generated by accessing: "Copy API command".

# Contribution
The analysis was made by Kazimieras Badokas, part of the code was suggested/explained by ChatGPT; Google Bard and ChatGPT were used to clarify names of the features, illustrations were made using Adobe Photoshop generative fill feature.

# License

License for the dataset:

TDatabase Contents License (DbCL)

MIT License for analysis:

Copyright (c) [2023] [Kazimieras Badokas]

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

